README.md, before:

# reproc

- [What is reproc?](#what-is-reproc)
- [Features](#features)
- [Questions](#questions)
- [Installation](#installation)
- [Dependencies](#dependencies)
- [CMake options](#cmake-options)
- [Documentation](#documentation)
- [Error handling](#error-handling)
- [Multithreading](#multithreading)
- [Gotchas](#gotchas)

## What is reproc?

reproc (Redirected Process) is a cross-platform C/C++ library that simplifies
starting, stopping and communicating with external programs. The main use case
is executing command line applications directly from C or C++ code and
retrieving their output.

reproc consists out of two libraries: reproc and reproc++. reproc is a C99
library that contains the actual code for working with external programs.
reproc++ depends on reproc and adapts its API to an idiomatic C++11 API. It also
adds a few extras that simplify working with external programs from C++.

## Features

- Start any program directly from C or C++ code.
- Communicate with a program via its standard streams.
- Wait for a program to exit or forcefully stop it yourself. When forcefully
  stopping a process you can either allow the process to clean up its resources
  or stop it immediately.
- The core library (reproc) is written in C99. An optional C++11 wrapper library
  (reproc++) with extra features is available for use in C++ applications.
- Multiple installation methods. Either build reproc as part of your project or
  use a system installed version of reproc.

## Questions

If you have any questions after reading the readme and documentation you can
either make an issue or ask questions directly in the reproc
[gitter](https://gitter.im/reproc/Lobby) channel.

## Installation

**Note: Building reproc requires CMake 3.12 or higher.**

There are multiple ways to get reproc into your project. One way is to build
reproc as part of your project using CMake. To do this, we first have to get the
reproc source code into the project. This can be done using any of the following
options:

- When using CMake 3.11 or later, you can use the CMake `FetchContent` API to
  download reproc when running CMake. See
  <https://cliutils.gitlab.io/modern-cmake/chapters/projects/fetch.html> for an
  example.
- Another option is to include reproc's repository as a git submodule.
  <https://cliutils.gitlab.io/modern-cmake/chapters/projects/submodule.html>
  provides more information.
- A very simple solution is to just include reproc's source code in your
  repository. You can download a zip of the source code without the git history
  and add it to your repository in a separate directory.

After including reproc's source code in your project, it can be built from the
root CMakeLists.txt file as follows:

```cmake
add_subdirectory(<path-to-reproc>) # For example: add_subdirectory(external/reproc)
```

CMake options can be specified before calling `add_subdirectory`:

```cmake
set(REPROC++ ON)
add_subdirectory(<path-to-reproc>)
```

**Note: If the option has already been cached in a previous CMake run, you'll
have to clear CMake's cache to apply the new default value.**

For more information on configuring reproc's build, see
[CMake options](#cmake-options).

You can also depend on an installed version of reproc. You can either build and
install reproc yourself or install reproc via a package manager. reproc is
available in the following package repositories:

- Arch User Repository (<https://aur.archlinux.org/packages/reproc>)
- vcpkg (https://github.com/microsoft/vcpkg/tree/master/ports/reproc)

If using a package manager is not an option, you can build and install reproc
from source (CMake 3.13+):

```sh
cmake -B build
cmake --build build
cmake --install build
```

Enable the `REPROC_TEST` option and build the `test` target to run the tests
(CMake 3.13+):

```sh
cmake -B build -DREPROC_TEST=ON
cmake --build build
cmake --build build --target test
```

After installing reproc your build system will have to find it. reproc provides
both CMake config files and pkg-config files to simplify finding a reproc
installation using CMake and pkg-config respectively. Note that reproc and
reproc++ are separate libraries and as a result have separate config files as
well. Make sure to search for the one you want to use.

To find an installed version of reproc using CMake:

```cmake
find_package(reproc) # Find reproc.
find_package(reproc++) # Find reproc++.
```

After building reproc as part of your project or finding a installed version of
reproc, you can link against it from within your CMakeLists.txt file as follows:

```cmake
target_link_libraries(myapp reproc) # Link against reproc.
target_link_libraries(myapp reproc++) # Link against reproc++.
```

From Meson 0.53.2 onwards, reproc can be included as a CMake subproject in Meson
build scripts. See https://mesonbuild.com/CMake-module.html for more
information.

## Dependencies

By default, reproc has a dependency on pthreads on POSIX systems (`-pthread`)
and a dependency on Winsock 2.2 on Windows systems (`-lws2_32`). CMake and
pkg-config handle these dependencies automatically.

## CMake options

reproc's build can be configured using the following CMake options:

### User

- `REPROC++`: Build reproc++ (default: `${REPROC_DEVELOP}`)
- `REPROC_TEST`: Build tests (default: `${REPROC_DEVELOP}`)

  Run the tests by running the `test` binary which can be found in the build
  directory after building reproc.

- `REPROC_EXAMPLES`: Build examples (default: `${REPROC_DEVELOP}`)

  The resulting binaries will be located in the examples folder of each project
  subdirectory in the build directory after building reproc.

### Advanced

- `REPROC_OBJECT_LIBRARIES`: Build CMake object libraries (default:
  `${REPROC_DEVELOP}`)

  This is useful to directly include reproc in another library. When building
  reproc as a static or shared library, it has to be installed alongside the
  consuming library which makes distributing the consuming library harder. When
  using object libraries, reproc's object files are included directly into the
  consuming library and no extra installation is necessary.

  **Note: reproc's object libraries will only link correctly from CMake 3.14
  onwards.**

  **Note: This option overrides `BUILD_SHARED_LIBS`.**

- `REPROC_INSTALL`: Generate installation rules (default: `ON` unless
  `REPROC_OBJECT_LIBRARIES` is enabled)
- `REPROC_INSTALL_CMAKECONFIGDIR`: CMake config files installation directory
  (default: `${CMAKE_INSTALL_LIBDIR}/cmake`)
- `REPROC_INSTALL_PKGCONFIG`: Install pkg-config files (default: `ON`)
- `REPROC_INSTALL_PKGCONFIGDIR`: pkg-config files installation directory
  (default: `${CMAKE_INSTALL_LIBDIR}/pkgconfig`)

- `REPROC_MULTITHREADED`: Use `pthread_sigmask` and link against the system's
  thread library (default: `ON`)

### Developer

- `REPROC_DEVELOP`: Configure option default values for development (default:
  `OFF` unless the `REPROC_DEVELOP` environment variable is set)
- `REPROC_SANITIZERS`: Build with sanitizers (default: `${REPROC_DEVELOP}`)
- `REPROC_TIDY`: Run clang-tidy when building (default: `${REPROC_DEVELOP}`)
- `REPROC_WARNINGS`: Enable compiler warnings (default: `${REPROC_DEVELOP}`)
- `REPROC_WARNINGS_AS_ERRORS`: Add -Werror or equivalent to the compile flags
  and clang-tidy (default: `OFF`)

## Documentation

Each function and class is documented extensively in its header file. Examples
can be found in the examples subdirectory of [reproc](reproc/examples) and
[reproc++](reproc++/examples).

## Error handling

On failure, Most functions in reproc's API return a negative `errno` (POSIX) or
`GetLastError` (Windows) style error code. For actionable errors, reproc
provides constants (`REPROC_ETIMEDOUT`, `REPROC_EPIPE`, ...) that can be used to
match against the error without having to write platform-specific code. To get a
string representation of an error, pass it to `reproc_strerror`.

reproc++'s API integrates with the C++ standard library error codes mechanism
(`std::error_code` and `std::error_condition`). Most methods in reproc++'s API
return `std::error_code` values that contain the actual system error that
occurred. You can test against these error codes using values from the
`std::errc` enum.

See the examples for more information on how to handle errors when using reproc.

## Multithreading

Don't call the same operation on the same child process from more than one
thread at the same time. For example: reading and writing to a child process
from different threads is fine but waiting on the same child process from two
different threads at the same time will result in issues.

## Gotchas

- (POSIX) It is strongly recommended to not call `waitpid` on pids of processes
  started by reproc.

  reproc uses `waitpid` to wait until a process has exited. Unfortunately,
  `waitpid` cannot be called twice on the same process. This means that
  `reproc_wait` won't work correctly if `waitpid` has already been called on a
  child process beforehand outside of reproc.

- It is strongly recommended to make sure each child process actually exits
  using `reproc_wait` or `reproc_stop`.

  On POSIX, a child process that has exited is a zombie process until the parent
  process waits on it using `waitpid`. A zombie process takes up resources and
  can be seen as a resource leak so it is important to make sure all processes
  exit correctly in a timely fashion.

- It is strongly recommend to try terminating a child process by waiting for it
  to exit or by calling `reproc_terminate` before resorting to `reproc_kill`.

  When using `reproc_kill` the child process does not receive a chance to
  perform cleanup which could result in resources being leaked. Chief among
  these leaks is that the child process will not be able to stop its own child
  processes. Always try to let a child process exit normally by calling
  `reproc_terminate` before calling `reproc_kill`. `reproc_stop` is a handy
  helper function that can be used to perform multiple stop actions in a row
  with timeouts inbetween.

- (POSIX) It is strongly recommended to ignore the `SIGPIPE` signal in the
  parent process.

  On POSIX, writing to a closed stdin pipe of a child process will terminate the
  parent process with the `SIGPIPE` signal by default. To avoid this, the
  `SIGPIPE` signal has to be ignored in the parent process. If the `SIGPIPE`
  signal is ignored `reproc_write` will return `REPROC_EPIPE` as expected when
  writing to a closed stdin pipe.

- While `reproc_terminate` allows the child process to perform cleanup it is up
  to the child process to correctly clean up after itself. reproc only sends a
  termination signal to the child process. The child process itself is
  responsible for cleaning up its own child processes and other resources.

- (Windows) `reproc_kill` is not guaranteed to kill a child process immediately
  on Windows. For more information, read the Remarks section in the
  documentation of the Windows `TerminateProcess` function that reproc uses to
  kill child processes on Windows.

- Child processes spawned via reproc inherit a single extra file handle which is
  used to wait for the child process to exit. If the child process closes this
  file handle manually, reproc will wrongly detect the child process has exited.
  If this handle is further inherited by other processes that outlive the child
  process, reproc will detect the child process is still running even if it has
  exited. If data is written to this handle, reproc will also wrongly detect the
  child process has exited.

- (Windows) If a child process exits before all outstanding data has been
  written to stdout or stderr, Windows will close the socket pipe prematurely
  (RST) leading to data loss. Currently, the only known way around this is by
  artificially making a process wait by flushing `stdout` and sleeping for +-
  200 milliseconds afterwards before exiting.

Commit message:

readme: Update Windows data loss gotcha.

README.md, after:

# reproc

- [What is reproc?](#what-is-reproc)
- [Features](#features)
- [Questions](#questions)
- [Installation](#installation)
- [Dependencies](#dependencies)
- [CMake options](#cmake-options)
- [Documentation](#documentation)
- [Error handling](#error-handling)
- [Multithreading](#multithreading)
- [Gotchas](#gotchas)

## What is reproc?

reproc (Redirected Process) is a cross-platform C/C++ library that simplifies
starting, stopping and communicating with external programs. The main use case
is executing command line applications directly from C or C++ code and
retrieving their output.

reproc consists out of two libraries: reproc and reproc++. reproc is a C99
library that contains the actual code for working with external programs.
reproc++ depends on reproc and adapts its API to an idiomatic C++11 API. It also
adds a few extras that simplify working with external programs from C++.

## Features

- Start any program directly from C or C++ code.
- Communicate with a program via its standard streams.
- Wait for a program to exit or forcefully stop it yourself. When forcefully
  stopping a process you can either allow the process to clean up its resources
  or stop it immediately.
- The core library (reproc) is written in C99. An optional C++11 wrapper library
  (reproc++) with extra features is available for use in C++ applications.
- Multiple installation methods. Either build reproc as part of your project or
  use a system installed version of reproc.

## Questions

If you have any questions after reading the readme and documentation you can
either make an issue or ask questions directly in the reproc
[gitter](https://gitter.im/reproc/Lobby) channel.

## Installation

**Note: Building reproc requires CMake 3.12 or higher.**

There are multiple ways to get reproc into your project. One way is to build
reproc as part of your project using CMake. To do this, we first have to get the
reproc source code into the project. This can be done using any of the following
options:

- When using CMake 3.11 or later, you can use the CMake `FetchContent` API to
  download reproc when running CMake. See
  <https://cliutils.gitlab.io/modern-cmake/chapters/projects/fetch.html> for an
  example.
- Another option is to include reproc's repository as a git submodule.
  <https://cliutils.gitlab.io/modern-cmake/chapters/projects/submodule.html>
  provides more information.
- A very simple solution is to just include reproc's source code in your
  repository. You can download a zip of the source code without the git history
  and add it to your repository in a separate directory.

After including reproc's source code in your project, it can be built from the
root CMakeLists.txt file as follows:

```cmake
add_subdirectory(<path-to-reproc>) # For example: add_subdirectory(external/reproc)
```

CMake options can be specified before calling `add_subdirectory`:

```cmake
set(REPROC++ ON)
add_subdirectory(<path-to-reproc>)
```

**Note: If the option has already been cached in a previous CMake run, you'll
have to clear CMake's cache to apply the new default value.**

For more information on configuring reproc's build, see
[CMake options](#cmake-options).

You can also depend on an installed version of reproc. You can either build and
install reproc yourself or install reproc via a package manager. reproc is
available in the following package repositories:

- Arch User Repository (<https://aur.archlinux.org/packages/reproc>)
- vcpkg (https://github.com/microsoft/vcpkg/tree/master/ports/reproc)

If using a package manager is not an option, you can build and install reproc
from source (CMake 3.13+):

```sh
cmake -B build
cmake --build build
cmake --install build
```

Enable the `REPROC_TEST` option and build the `test` target to run the tests
(CMake 3.13+):

```sh
cmake -B build -DREPROC_TEST=ON
cmake --build build
cmake --build build --target test
```

After installing reproc your build system will have to find it. reproc provides
both CMake config files and pkg-config files to simplify finding a reproc
installation using CMake and pkg-config respectively. Note that reproc and
reproc++ are separate libraries and as a result have separate config files as
well. Make sure to search for the one you want to use.

To find an installed version of reproc using CMake:

```cmake
find_package(reproc) # Find reproc.
find_package(reproc++) # Find reproc++.
```

After building reproc as part of your project or finding a installed version of
reproc, you can link against it from within your CMakeLists.txt file as follows:

```cmake
target_link_libraries(myapp reproc) # Link against reproc.
target_link_libraries(myapp reproc++) # Link against reproc++.
```

From Meson 0.53.2 onwards, reproc can be included as a CMake subproject in Meson
build scripts. See https://mesonbuild.com/CMake-module.html for more
information.

## Dependencies

By default, reproc has a dependency on pthreads on POSIX systems (`-pthread`)
and a dependency on Winsock 2.2 on Windows systems (`-lws2_32`). CMake and
pkg-config handle these dependencies automatically.

## CMake options

reproc's build can be configured using the following CMake options:

### User

- `REPROC++`: Build reproc++ (default: `${REPROC_DEVELOP}`)
- `REPROC_TEST`: Build tests (default: `${REPROC_DEVELOP}`)

  Run the tests by running the `test` binary which can be found in the build
  directory after building reproc.

- `REPROC_EXAMPLES`: Build examples (default: `${REPROC_DEVELOP}`)

  The resulting binaries will be located in the examples folder of each project
  subdirectory in the build directory after building reproc.

### Advanced

- `REPROC_OBJECT_LIBRARIES`: Build CMake object libraries (default:
  `${REPROC_DEVELOP}`)

  This is useful to directly include reproc in another library. When building
  reproc as a static or shared library, it has to be installed alongside the
  consuming library which makes distributing the consuming library harder. When
  using object libraries, reproc's object files are included directly into the
  consuming library and no extra installation is necessary.

  **Note: reproc's object libraries will only link correctly from CMake 3.14
  onwards.**

  **Note: This option overrides `BUILD_SHARED_LIBS`.**

- `REPROC_INSTALL`: Generate installation rules (default: `ON` unless
  `REPROC_OBJECT_LIBRARIES` is enabled)
- `REPROC_INSTALL_CMAKECONFIGDIR`: CMake config files installation directory
  (default: `${CMAKE_INSTALL_LIBDIR}/cmake`)
- `REPROC_INSTALL_PKGCONFIG`: Install pkg-config files (default: `ON`)
- `REPROC_INSTALL_PKGCONFIGDIR`: pkg-config files installation directory
  (default: `${CMAKE_INSTALL_LIBDIR}/pkgconfig`)

- `REPROC_MULTITHREADED`: Use `pthread_sigmask` and link against the system's
  thread library (default: `ON`)

### Developer

- `REPROC_DEVELOP`: Configure option default values for development (default:
  `OFF` unless the `REPROC_DEVELOP` environment variable is set)
- `REPROC_SANITIZERS`: Build with sanitizers (default: `${REPROC_DEVELOP}`)
- `REPROC_TIDY`: Run clang-tidy when building (default: `${REPROC_DEVELOP}`)
- `REPROC_WARNINGS`: Enable compiler warnings (default: `${REPROC_DEVELOP}`)
- `REPROC_WARNINGS_AS_ERRORS`: Add -Werror or equivalent to the compile flags
  and clang-tidy (default: `OFF`)

## Documentation

Each function and class is documented extensively in its header file. Examples
can be found in the examples subdirectory of [reproc](reproc/examples) and
[reproc++](reproc++/examples).

## Error handling

On failure, Most functions in reproc's API return a negative `errno` (POSIX) or
`GetLastError` (Windows) style error code. For actionable errors, reproc
provides constants (`REPROC_ETIMEDOUT`, `REPROC_EPIPE`, ...) that can be used to
match against the error without having to write platform-specific code. To get a
string representation of an error, pass it to `reproc_strerror`.

reproc++'s API integrates with the C++ standard library error codes mechanism
(`std::error_code` and `std::error_condition`). Most methods in reproc++'s API
return `std::error_code` values that contain the actual system error that
occurred. You can test against these error codes using values from the
`std::errc` enum.

See the examples for more information on how to handle errors when using reproc.

## Multithreading

Don't call the same operation on the same child process from more than one
thread at the same time. For example: reading and writing to a child process
from different threads is fine but waiting on the same child process from two
different threads at the same time will result in issues.

## Gotchas

- (POSIX) It is strongly recommended to not call `waitpid` on pids of processes
  started by reproc.

  reproc uses `waitpid` to wait until a process has exited. Unfortunately,
  `waitpid` cannot be called twice on the same process. This means that
  `reproc_wait` won't work correctly if `waitpid` has already been called on a
  child process beforehand outside of reproc.

- It is strongly recommended to make sure each child process actually exits
  using `reproc_wait` or `reproc_stop`.

  On POSIX, a child process that has exited is a zombie process until the parent
  process waits on it using `waitpid`. A zombie process takes up resources and
  can be seen as a resource leak so it is important to make sure all processes
  exit correctly in a timely fashion.

- It is strongly recommend to try terminating a child process by waiting for it
  to exit or by calling `reproc_terminate` before resorting to `reproc_kill`.

  When using `reproc_kill` the child process does not receive a chance to
  perform cleanup which could result in resources being leaked. Chief among
  these leaks is that the child process will not be able to stop its own child
  processes. Always try to let a child process exit normally by calling
  `reproc_terminate` before calling `reproc_kill`. `reproc_stop` is a handy
  helper function that can be used to perform multiple stop actions in a row
  with timeouts inbetween.

- (POSIX) It is strongly recommended to ignore the `SIGPIPE` signal in the
  parent process.

  On POSIX, writing to a closed stdin pipe of a child process will terminate the
  parent process with the `SIGPIPE` signal by default. To avoid this, the
  `SIGPIPE` signal has to be ignored in the parent process. If the `SIGPIPE`
  signal is ignored `reproc_write` will return `REPROC_EPIPE` as expected when
  writing to a closed stdin pipe.

- While `reproc_terminate` allows the child process to perform cleanup it is up
  to the child process to correctly clean up after itself. reproc only sends a
  termination signal to the child process. The child process itself is
  responsible for cleaning up its own child processes and other resources.

- (Windows) `reproc_kill` is not guaranteed to kill a child process immediately
  on Windows. For more information, read the Remarks section in the
  documentation of the Windows `TerminateProcess` function that reproc uses to
  kill child processes on Windows.

- Child processes spawned via reproc inherit a single extra file handle which is
  used to wait for the child process to exit. If the child process closes this
  file handle manually, reproc will wrongly detect the child process has exited.
  If this handle is further inherited by other processes that outlive the child
  process, reproc will detect the child process is still running even if it has
  exited. If data is written to this handle, reproc will also wrongly detect the
  child process has exited.

- (Windows) If a child process exits without manually calling `fclose(stdout)`
  or `fclose(stderr)`, Windows can close the socket pipe prematurely before all
  outstanding data on the corresponding stream is sent to the parent, resulting
  in the parent process not receiving all output from the child process.
  Currently, the only known way around this issue is to explicitly call
  `fclose(stdout)` and `fclose(stderr)` in the child process before exiting.
  The issue has been reported and its status can be followed
  [here](https://developercommunity.visualstudio.com/content/problem/977949/child-process-redirect-stdio-to-sockets-stdio-not.html).
